---
layout: post
title: Inis Review 
categories:
- games
---
I don't know a lot about Christian Martinez, which surprises me. It surprises me because the one game of his I do know - Inis - feels like the culmination of a lifetime's work. It surprised me to find only two other games on his BGG profile, one I'd never heard of - Expedition Altiplano - and one I'd never played - Histrio.

Inis's individual components fit together as well as... well, as well as its hyper-real tessellating map tiles. Which is to say, very well, to a level that is almost impossible to believe or appreciate at first sight. They, and it, are works of art.

Actually, is it art, or a Swiss watch? It's one of the two. Certainly not a war game, but that makes sense because it is not that. It's area-control, yes, I will concede that, but the area is... 3 dimensional? Sort of? Because of a mechanic that allows you to win from control of either the territories or from outnumbering opposing players' clans who have taken up residence, it's like the area control seeps outwards, or upwards, like 3D naughts and crosses. You can also win by having your clan members just hanging out in the same place as some sanctuaries. It's these swirling, related but distinct victory conditions that give Inis a fuzzy, mystical edge, that luckily the theme just embraces.

But perhaps this is all getting a little ahead of itself. Inis takes place on a board, for it is a board game, and each player inhabits a clan. There is drafting: because the mechanism provided to take actions on the board is a deck of cards, split between the players and given the traditional "take one and pass them on" treatment, with a small citrus twist. Drafting games usually assume that cards already taken are set in stone. In this case, your selected cards and the cards passed to you are fluid and indistinct - all that matters is that you pass on one less than you receive. This gives more control over your strategies and increases the chance of securing a combination that alters the board to your pleasing.

But it's the combat that impresses. I've not played every game ever, I don't think, but I'm prepared to bet that there is not many other systems where you simply continue hitting each other until you mutually decide that hitting each other is horrible and maybe you should think about another way to resolve your conflict.

Essentially, upon "Initiating a Clash"(tm), the initiator's combatants find themselves with really only two choices - to continue attacking (which removes a clan from the board or, almost even more painfully, a card from your hand and thus your very limited pool of actions) or beg, cry and cajole the other player to stop hitting you, and hope for peace. This isn't quite all the rules in a combat (describing rules is boring) but it's enough to understand the dynamic. This is a game about knowing when enough is enough - and convincing your opponent of the same.

The multiple victory conditions described above is what makes the combat really hum. Murder, even the apparent lesser crime of war-murder, doesn't factor in any of them. Two of them simply require your clans to _be places_, and one of them requires your clan to outnumber other clans in their regions. So killing is never really required, and unless it really sets back an opponent, it's to everyone's benefit to just, you know, chill out a bit, yeah? Let's have a bloody festival.

So it's a game of balance. It's a game of wheedling. It's not exactly what I would call negotiation - it pretty rare that you directly trade one area for another, certainly in our group - but it's a game of don't-hurt-me-and-I-won't-hurt-you. And it remains so until someone makes a dash for the finish line, at which point all bets are off and you hurt them as much as you can, really stomping on their sensitive bits, and just hope it's not too late.

Because the end game is perhaps the most interesting part of all. The three victory conditions are in no way mutually exclusive - you could achieve all three, if your opponents fell gently asleep during a turn or two. This can lead to the interesting situation where two or more opponents have what it takes to win on the final turn. Provided in the box are Pretender tokens; slabs of cardboard that allow you to show those playing that you have what it takes to win that round. "Check-mate" tiles, if you will. You have to have picked one up for your win to count, and anyone who does so is painting a neat target onto their forehead for the rest of the round, if not game, so ideally there won't be too much left of it.

I've owned Inis for going on four years now, and - deep breath - it's _still_ pretty close to being my favourite game I own. I haven't even talked about the expansion, Seasons of Inis, which adds some lovely little touches at almost no additional mental overhead. I say almost, but adding anything to this game is risky business - it's taut like trampoline, and even 4 years on, I still mess up at least one small rule a session. It's not complicated but - back to the Swiss Watch analogy - boy do those little moving parts mesh tightly, and when they do, you need to know how to handle it.

But what a joy to do so. A long game, it can be, but you never feel disengaged in that whole time, even if you are losing. The opportunity to upset the table is never far away, because having the most 'stuff' on the board doesn't exactly correlate to the most win conditions. It's all about positioning - and, of course, having the most stuff when you need it.

Overall, the dust has settled on Inis (it was released in 2016) and it's settled in the best way. A rare, generational game that I will never get rid of, and hopefully, never stop getting to the table.
